---
Title: Today just hasn't been my day!
Tags: 
  - 
RedirectFrom:
  - 20191127
---

I like to think of myself of a positive person for the most part, but today's been one of those testing days!

I write this in jest of course. In reality I have a home, a job, a loving family and things are fantastic. It's just, I've had one of the days that you couldn't write and I want to get it down in a post if only to look back on it and think "Yeah, that just wasn't my day".

So, yesterday (Tuesday), I spent the day working in Leeds. In the week leading up it my laptop had been giving me frequent problems and so I'd left it with our engineers for repair. It was inconvenient, but I could manage without it so it wasn't an issue. I got word that it was repaired and ready for collection around 4pm that same day and so as I was hoping to work from home today (Wednesday) I decided to call into the office on my way home from Leeds to pick it up. A quick stop later, it was sitting on my desk at home, powered on and ready to go.

But I couldn't log on to it. It turns out our engineers had re-imaged it, meaning they'd installed the operating system again from scratch and fresh copies of all the usual software that goes with it (Office, Skype, etc.). As far as the laptop was concerned, I wasn't a familiar user and without being physically connected to our corporate network it couldn't verify my identity. So, it wasn't about to give me any access. But, not a problem I thought... I'll swing by the office first thing in the morning, log on and then head back home to work for the day. Again, inconvenient, but not an issue. 7am came around and I drove to the office and got myself logged on. Great! 10 minutes later I was back home and ready to work.

But I couldn't connect to anything. Our remote VPN software hadn't been installed as part of the repair. That meant I couldn't access our corporate network from home, so no emails, documents or systems that I needed to work. Nuts! There went my day working from home. I'd have to go in instead. Not a problem though, once the morning routine was finished with the kids, I'd join my wife on the school run and jump out at the office on the way. 8:30am cames around and I was being dropped off. Perfect.

But I didn't have my laptop. It'd been a busy morning to that point and at 8:15am a plasterer had arrived to skim our living room ceiling. We moved into a house a few months ago that needed a lot of work and he was here to do the next bit of it. In the rush to greet him, make him a cuppa, get the kids coats and shoes on, get them in the car, get our bags in the boot, etc. I forgot my bag! Now that actually was a problem, but not to worry - while there wasn't time to run home and get it without making the kids late for school, I could do the school run with my wife, grab my bag afterwards and then head into the office (for the third time today).

So all a bit unfortunate, but I still arrived at work by 9:15am and I made it to lunchtime before...

The plasterer called. "Rich, your powers tripped out at home. Where's your fuse box?". Well, our fuse box is in our garage - behind an electric roller door. An electric roller door that doesn't work when the electric is off! At this point my wife had taken our youngest child to a play area and had just ordered her some food so she wasn't available to help sort this. Cue a frantic walk home to see if I could get the power back on before the freezer started to defrost. Also, it was a dark rainy day today and the plasterer needed the lights on ideally to see what he was doing.

Coming home from Leeds yesterday I'd dropped and broken my umbrella so I didn't have it with me today. The SuperDry coat that I was wearing would have been better rebranded MildlyWet. I got home 25 minutes later soaked. Still, I solved the electric problem and I'd managed to get the remote VPN software working on my laptop before lunch, so I could work from home now after all.

It's been a strange ol' day!